we welcome back to the natural language
processing course
to continue now with the final section
on language modeling part three so let's
look at some additional issues related
to language modes first or how do we
evaluate the quality of a language model
well there are two types of evaluations
the first one is known as an extrinsic
evaluation and that is to use the
language model in a specific application
for example speech recognition or
machine translation or part of speech
tagging and the second method is based
on an intrinsic evaluation that has to
do with the properties of the language
model itself it's much cheaper than an
extrinsic evaluation because it can be
done automatically however it is very
important not to use it as a complete
substitute for an extrinsic evaluation
at the very least if you use an
intrinsic evaluation you have to also do
some sort of extrinsic evaluation to be
able to correlate the two and once you
have a good idea of how the to map to
each other then you can continue using
just an intrinsic method let's see some
of the intrinsic methods first so the
most commonly used method is known as
perplexity so the perplexity is given by
this formula here we take the joint
probability of all the words in a
sentence
take the reciprocal bit and then take
the nth root of that number that gives
us the perplexity so this is an estimate
on how well the model fits the data good
language model is one that is going to
give a high probability to a real
sentence so the perplexity can be
thought of as the average branching
factor and predicting the next word
lower perplexity is better because it's
correlated with higher probability of
the sentence so in this formula n is the
number of words in the sentence and
let's look at an example now suppose
that we have a set of words and
equiprobable words where the probability
of each of them is 1 over K so given the
formula for perplexity we can now
compute the value for the specific
example so the value is going to be 1 K
to the nth power to the power of minus 1
over n which is the ant's root so the N
and the 1 over n are going to cancel and
we're going to get 1 over K to the power
minus 1 which is essentially the
original number K so in that case what
happens is that the perplexities
actly equal to the number of
equiprobable choices that we are making
so if we have let's say ten words to
choose from the perplexity is going to
be equal to ten if those words are
equally likely so this is another way to
assert that perplexity is like a
branching factor this is a logarithmic
version that can also be used in that
case we just have the base two or base
ten logarithm of this previous formula
so we have 2 to the power of minus 1
over n the sum of the logarithms of the
probabilities of the individual words
and this should give us the exact same
value as non logarithmic version so the
use of perplexity is related to the so
called Shannon game named after Claude
Shannon let's see what it looks like in
the Shannon game you're trying to
predict the next word in a sequence
based on the words so far so if you say
so like New York Governor Andrew Cuomo
said and then you want to predict the
next word or you can try to predict it
yourselves and you see that this is not
an easy task you may say for example
that the next word is duh for example
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo said the
next item on his agenda is such an
saturate maybe some other word for
example that New York Governor Andrew
Cuomo said that on the next day he's
going to travel however it's very likely
to the next word is said or comb or or
any word that was already used in the
sentence it's also very likely that it's
a word that usually doesn't follow the
word set for example some adjectives so
the Shannon game is essential to predict
the next word so let's try this with a
simple example what's the propensity of
guessing a digit if all the digits are
equally likely well as you can imagine
from the previous slide the answer is 10
what about predicting the next letter in
a sequence well again since there are 26
equiprobable choices the perplexity is
equal to 26 now this perplexity is going
to get lower if we have a better
understanding of the words that have
already been said before so for numbers
it's not going to work but for words it
may make sense for example if we have
seen that the first letter of the word
is T the probability that the next
letter is also T is going to be very
small the probability the next letter is
x is also going to be very small but the
ability of having the next letters as H
or EU are all going to be larger so in
this case we don't have any more an
equitable distribution of letters we
have something that is different and in
that case the average branching factor
is going to be smaller than 26 and this
is exactly where perplexity is useful so
here's an example from the Josh Goodman
paper that I mentioned earlier how about
guessing one of the next words that a
customer is going to say over the phone
when they call customer service so let's
assume that the probability that they're
going to say the word operator is one in
four that they're going to say say the
word sales with the probability of one
and four and that there are 10,000 other
cases that add up to a probability of
1/2 for example those could be the
10,000 names of people who work at the
company so this case again will have to
take a weighted sum of those numbers
using the harmonic mean and that is
going to give us the average branching
factor that corresponds to this
particular language model so how do we
measure perfects the cost distributions
this is a very important problem in
naturalized processing because very
often the language model is trained on
one particular set of data and tested on
a completely different set of data if
the two are drawn from the same
distribution the perplexity should be
the same on both however this is often
not the case they often people train for
example part of speech tagger on news
stories and then they test it on social
media and they are very surprised to see
that the performance is pretty low and
this is not surprising because the
perplexity can tell us that this is
going to happen it turns out that when
the two distributions are very different
there are also called cross entropy
between the two distributions is going
to be higher so here's an example if we
were training a language model with the
previous slides data but however it
turns out that the 10,000 cases are
equally likely again but there are no
options for the user to say either sales
or operator so in that case the new
probability distribution is going to be
very different instead of having one
quarter one quarter and then 10,000
values
adapt 1/2 we're going to have 0 0 and
then 10,000 values that add up to 1
so the cross entropy is equal to the log
of the perplexity and its measured in
bits and this is the formula given to
probability distributions and as you can
see if the two probability distributions
have very different this cross entropy
is going to be very large and if they're
very similar then it's going to be at
its minimum so some sample values for
propensity from real-life natural
language data they have been computed
from the Wall Street Journal in the late
90s on the corpus of 38 million words or
38 million tokens that correspond to
20,000 different words or types so the
propensity that was computed on a
separate sample of 1.5 million documents
for the same corpus was 962 for Union
grams this is a de level of words not
letters for backgrounds it went down as
low as 170 and then as you would expect
with track grams it went even lower to
109 so what that means is that even
though you can have a total of 20,000
words in your corpus just by using a
unigram model you're going from 20,000
to less than 1,000 choices on average
and if you're going to try Gramps then
you go down by a factor of 200 from
20,000 to 100 so one other metric that
is used for evaluating language models
is the so called word error rate it is
equal to the number of insertions
deletions and substitutions of between
two strings it's very similar to what we
had earlier called the Levenstein at a
distance and as you remember this is
something that is normalized by sentence
length so here's an example suppose that
we have one string Governor Andrew Cuomo
had met with the mayor and another
sentence the governor met the senator
can you figure out what is the Edit
distance between those two strings I'll
give you the answer in a minute so as
you can see there are three deletions we
have removed the word Andrew the word
Cuomo and the word with we have one
insertion we have added the word there
at the beginning and we have one
substitution where we replace the word
mayor with the word
so that's a pretty large word a rate of
five even if you normalize it with the
sentence language will still be a word
error rate of normalized word error rate
of one so now let's consider two issues
that come up when we deal with language
models the first one is how to deal with
other vocabulary words or all the words
so those are words that appear in the
test data that we have never seen in the
training data now for the purposes of
estimating their probabilities we can
split the training data into two parts
and label all the words in part two that
are not in part one as unknown words so
then the estimates for those unknown
words will be used as estimates when we
would deal with a testing data another
thing that we can do something called
clustering we can for example combine
all of the information that we have
about all the data expressions together
all the monetary amounts together
separately all the organizations and all
the years in that case we can have
conditional probabilities that say
what's the probability that a certain
word WI is going to appear after a year
expression so in this case all the year
expressions combined together to give
additional strength to the prediction so
some of the points that long that
language models don't model very well
are named long-distance dependences so
this is where m gram language models
essentially fail by definition because
they only allow to look at one or two
words back so here's an example we may
be missing some syntactic information so
for example let's consider the two
sentences here the students who
participated in the game are tired so
the word R is conditional on the
students so this is the subject those
are the subject and the verb of the
sentence they're syntactically related
however there is a total of five words
that intervene so any Engram model
shorter than six grams is going to miss
this dependency so it's not going to
make any distinction between this
sentence and the next one which says
that the student who participated in the
game is tired so again we have an
instance of agreement that goes back
more than five words so train gum and
language models are not going to be able
to deal with this information the same
thing applies to missing semantic
information so
here two sentences the pizza that I had
last night was tasty so tasty in this
case modifies pizza and it makes sense
because the word taste is something that
you expect a pizza to have as a property
but if I change it to the class that I
had last night was interesting you will
see that tasty doesn't fit in this
context and yet attract our model we'll
design of the same probability in both
cases so because of tours before it our
night and was so that Trey Graham and
Graham model in this case is going to
miss the semantic information because of
the long distance between the two words
that are semantically related so there
are techniques to deal with this kind of
problem for example you can use a
syntactic language model that looks not
just at the most recent words but also
the most recent words that are
syntactically related to the current
word so you need to parse the sentence
and then figure out that the pizza is
related to tasty using a dependency or
perhaps some specific syntactic
connection and then you can condition
the word tasty on the pizza and
similarly condition the word interesting
on the word the class there's some other
ideas that you can use I just mentioned
the syntactic model so again it is that
you want to condition some words on
other words that appear a specific
syntactic relation with them if you'll
also use something called a caching
model and that is to take advantage of
the fact that words appear in bursts so
if you see the word Cuomo in a document
it's very likely that the word Cuomo is
going to appear again in the same
document so if you keep track of the
words that have appeared in the most
recent history you can give them higher
probability of appearing in the future
so I'm going to conclude this section by
pointing you to several external
resources that are relevant to language
modeling the first one is s RI language
modeling toolkit which is available from
the ESRI website the second one is the
CMU language modeling toolkit which is
available from the CMU website both of
those are very popular
I think the SI system is more popular
these days and they do more or less the
same thing they allow it to train
maximum likelihood estimates from the
training data set for any sort of length
of engrams including as many as four and
five grams you can also use
to compute perplexity you can use them
to label sequences and you can also use
them to estimate probabilities using
back off an interpolation I would like
also to mention a large corpus of Google
engrams that is available on the
internet which has data from billions of
documents and I'm going to show you
later some examples of data from that
data set there is also possibility to
look at the engrams site proposed by
Google which allows you to track the
presence of engrams historically over
hundreds of years here some example
Google engrams so you can see that
they're very large values here all the
backgrounds are conditioned on the word
house and you can see only the first few
of those so for example the word are
appearing after house has a frequency of
three hundred two thousand four hundred
thirty five after appears after house
one hundred eighteen thousand times and
so on
so you can see that those are very large
numbers and they can be used to get very
reasonable estimates of background
probabilities that you can use in your
systems so a few more external links
here about engrams so some of those
websites use engrams to randomly
generate text for example scientific
papers and poems and country band names
and so on some of them are really fun I
would encourage you to take a look at
those on your own time so this concludes
the section on language modeling